---
title: Storage Power Consensus
statusIcon: ✅
entries:
- storage_power_actor
---

TODO: remove all stale .id, .go files referenced

{{<label storage_power_consensus>}}
The Storage Power Consensus subsystem is the main interface which enables Filecoin nodes to agree on the state of the system. SPC accounts for individual storage miners' effective power over consensus in given chains in its {{<sref power_table>}}. It also runs {{<sref expected_consensus>}} (the underlying consensus algorithm in use by Filecoin), enabling storage miners to run leader election and generate new blocks updating the state of the Filecoin system.

Succinctly, the SPC subsystem offers the following services:

- Access to the {{<sref power_table>}} for every subchain, accounting for individual storage miner power and total power on-chain.
- Access to {{<sref expected_consensus>}} for individual storage miners, enabling:

    - Access to verifiable randomness {{<sref tickets>}} as provided by {{<sref drand>}} for the rest of the protocol.
    - Running  {{<sref leader_election>}} to produce new blocks.
    - Running {{<sref chain_selection>}} across subchains using EC's weighting function.
    - Identification of {{<sref finality "the most recently finalized tipset">}}, for use by all protocol participants.

Much of the Storage Power Consensus' subsystem functionality is detailed in the code below but we touch upon some of its behaviors in more detail.

{{< readfile file="storage_power_consensus_subsystem.id" code="true" lang="go" >}}

## Distinguishing between storage miners and block miners

There are two ways to earn Filecoin tokens in the Filecoin network:

- By participating in the {{<sref storage_market>}} as a storage provider and being paid by clients for file storage deals.
- By mining new blocks on the network, helping modify system state and secure the Filecoin consensus mechanism.

We must distinguish between both types of "miners" (storage and block miners). {{<sref leader_election>}} in Filecoin is predicated on a miner's storage power. Thus, while all block miners will be storage miners, the reverse is not necessarily true.

However, given Filecoin's "useful Proof-of-Work" is achieved through file storage (PoRep and PoSt), there is little overhead cost for storage miners to participate in leader election. Such a {{<sref storage_miner_actor>}} need only register with the {{<sref storage_power_actor>}} in order to participate in Expected Consensus and mine blocks.

{{<label storage_power>}}
## On Power

Claimed power is assigned to every sector as a static function of its `SectorStorageWeightDesc` which includes `SectorSize`, `Duration`, and `DealWeight`. DealWeight is a measure that maps size and duration of active deals in a sector during its lifetime to its impact on power and reward distribution. A CommittedCapacity Sector (see {{<sref storage_mining_subsystem "Sector Types">}}) will have a DealWeight of zero but all sectors have an explicit Duration which is defined from the ChainEpoch that the sector comes online in a ProveCommit message to the Expiration ChainEpoch of the sector. In principle, power is the number of votes a miner has in leader election and it is a point in time concept of storage. However, the exact function that maps `SectorStorageWeightDesc` to claimed `StoragePower` and `BlockReward` will be announced soon.

More precisely,

- Claimed power = power from ProveCommit sectors minus sectors in TemporaryFault effective duration.
- Nominal power = claimed power, unless the miner is in DetectedFault or Challenged state. Nominal power is used to determine total network storage power for purposes of consensus minimum.
- Consensus power = nominal power, unless the miner fails to meet consensus minimum, or is undercollateralized.

{{<label beacon_entries>}}
## Beacon Entries

The Filecoin protocol uses randomness produced by a {{<sref drand>}} beacon to seed unbiasable randomness seeds for use in the chain (see {{<sref randomness>}}).

In turn these random seeds are used by:

- The {{<sref sector_sealer>}} as SealSeeds to bind sector commitments to a given subchain.
- The {{<sref post_generator>}} as PoStChallenges to prove sectors remain committed as of a given block.
- The Storage Power subsystem as randomness in {{<sref leader_election>}} to determine their eligibility to mine a block.

This randomness may be drawn from various Filecoin chain epochs by the respective protocols that use them according to their security requirements.

It is important to note that a given Filecoin network and a given drand network
need not have the same round time, i.e. blocks may be generated faster or slower
by Filecoin than randomness is generated by drand.  For instance, if the drand
beacon is producing randomness twice as fast as Filecoin produces blocks, we
might expect two random values to be produced in a Filecoin epoch, conversely if
the Filecoin network is twice as fast as drand, we might expect a random value
every other Filecoin epoch. Accordingly, depending on both networks'
configurations, certain Filecoin blocks could contain multiple or no drand
entries.
Furthermore, it must be that any call to the drand network for a new randomness
entry during an outage should be blocking, as noted with the `drand.Public()`
calls below.
In all cases, Filecoin blocks must include all drand beacon outputs generated
since the last epoch in the `BeaconEntries` field of the block header. Any use
of randomness from a given Filecoin epoch should use the last valid drand entry
included in a Filecoin block. This is shown below.

### Get drand randomness for VM

For operations such as PoRep creation, proof validations, or anything that
requires randomness for the Filecoin VM, the following method shows how to
extract the drand entry from the chain.
Note that the round may span multiple filecoin epochs if drand is slower; the
lowest epoch number block will contain the requested beacon entry. As well, if
there has been null rounds where the beacon should have been inserted, we need
to iterate on the chain to find where the entry is inserted.

```go
func GetRandomnessFromBeacon(e ChainEpoch, head ChainEpoch) {
  // get the drand round associated with the timestamp of this epoch.
  drandRound := MaxBeaconRoundForEpoch(e)
  // get the minimum drand timestamp associated with the drand round
  drandTs := drandGenesisTime + (drandPeriod-1) * drandRound 
  // get the minimum filecoin epoch associated with this timestamp
  minEpoch := (drandTs - filGenesisTime) / filEpochDuration 
  for minEpoch < head {
     // if this is not a null block, then it must have the entry we want
    if !chain.IsNullBlock(minEpoch) 
         // it may be the first or the last entry depending on the reason why
         // there was a null block before. If the drand entry is 
         // not assicated with this block, it means the block is invalid - but
         // this condition is caught by the block validation logic.
         returns getDrandEntryFromBlockHeader(chain.Block(minEpoch))
    // otherwise, we need to continue progressing on the chain, i.e. maybe no
    // miner were elected or filecoin / drand outage
    minEpoch++
  }
}

func getDrandEntryFromBlockHeader(block,round) (DrandEntry,error) {
    for _,dr := range block.DrandEntries {
        if dr.Round == round {
            return dr
        }
    }
    return errors.New("drand entry not found in block")
}
```

### Get randomness from drand network

When mining, a miner can fetch entries from the drand network to include them in
the new block by calling the method `GetBeaconEntriesForEpoch`.
```
GetBeaconEntriesForEpoch(epoch) []BeaconEntry {

    // special case genesis: the genesis block is pre-generated and so cannot include a beacon entry 
    // (since it will not have been generated). Hence, we only start checking beacon entries at the first block after genesis.
    // If that block includes a wrong beacon entry, we simply assume that a majority of honest miners at network birth will
    // simply fork.
    entries := []
    if epoch == 0 {
        return entries
    }

    maxDrandRound := MaxBeaconRoundForEpoch(epoch)

    // if checking the first post-genesis block, simply fetch the latest entry.
    if epoch == 1 {
        rand := drand.Public(maxDrandRound)
        return append(entries, rand)
    }

    // for the rest, fetch all drand entries generated between this epoch and last
    prevMaxDrandRound := MaxBeaconRoundForEpoch(epoch - 1)
    if (maxDrandRound == prevMaxDrandRound) {
        // no new beacon randomness
        return entries
    }

    entries := []
    curr := maxDrandRound
    for curr > prevMaxDrandRound {
        rand := drand.Public(curr)
        entries = append(entries, rand)
        curr -= 1
    }
    // return entries in increasing order
    reverse(entries)
    return entries
}
```

XXX: is it ever used this function ?
```go
// Note that the below function is a temporary solution and likely to be
// updated in future. 
GetBeaconEntryForEpoch(epoch) BeaconEntry {
    var rand Randomness
    for rand == nil {
        seeds := GetBeaconEntriesForEpoch(epoch)
        if seeds == nil {
            epoch -= 1
        } else {
            rand = seeds[len(seeds)-1].Randomness
        }
    }
    return rand
}
```


{{<label beacon_entry_validation>}}
### Validating Beacon Entries on block reception

Per the above, a Filecoin chain will contain the entirety of the beacon's output from the Filecoin genesis to the current block.

Given their role in leader election and other critical protocols in Filecoin, a block's beacon entries must be validated for every block. See {{<sref drand>}} for details. This can be done by ensuring every beacon entry is a valid signature over the prior one in the chain, using drand's [`Verify`](https://github.com/drand/drand/blob/master/beacon/beacon.go#L72) endpoint as follows:

```go
// This need not be done for the genesis block
// We assume that blockHeader and priorBlockHeader are two valid subsequent headers where block was mined atop priorBlock
ValidateBeaconEntries(blockHeader, priorBlockHeader) error {
    currEntries := blockHeader.BeaconEntries
    prevEntries := priorBlockHeader.BeaconEntries

    maxRoundForEntry := MaxBeaconRoundForEpoch(blockHeader.Epoch)
    // ensure entries are not repeated in blocks
    lastBlocksLastEntry := prevEntries[len(prevEntries)-1]
    if lastBlocksLastEntry == maxRound && len(currEntries) != 0 {
        return errors.New("Did not expect a new entry in this round.")
    }

    // preparing to check that entries properly follow one another
    var entries []BeaconEntry
    // at currIdx == 0, must fetch last Fil block's last BeaconEntry
    entries := append(entries, lastBlocksLastEntry)
    entries := append(entries, currEntries...)

    currIdx := len(entries) - 1
    // ensure that the last entry in the header is not in the future (i.e. that this is not a Filecoin
    // block being mined with a future known drand entry).
    if entries[currIdx].Round != maxRoundForEntry {
        return fmt.Errorf("expected final beacon entry in block to be at round %d, got %d", maxRound, last.Round)
    }

    for currIdx >= 0 {
        // walking back the entries to ensure they follow one another
        currEntry := entries[currIdx]
        prevEntry := entries[currIdx - 1]
        err := drand.Verify(node.drandPubKey, prevEntry.Data, currEntry.Data, currEntry.Round)
        if err != nil {
            return err
        }
        currIdx -= 1
    }

    return nil
}
```

{{<label tickets>}}
## Tickets

Filecoin block headers also contain a single "ticket" generated from its epoch's beacon entry. Tickets are used to break ties in the Fork Choice Rule, for forks of equal weight.

You can find the Ticket data structure {{<sref data_structures "here">}}.

Whenever comparing tickets in Filecoin, the comparison is that of the ticket's VRFDigest's bytes.

{{<label ticket_generation>}}
### Randomness Ticket generation

At a Filecoin epoch n, a new ticket is generated using the appropriate beacon entry for epoch n.

The miner runs the beacon entry through a Verifiable Random Function (VRF) to get a new unique ticket. The beacon entry is prepended with the ticket domain separation tag and concatenated with the miner actor address (to ensure miners using the same worker keys get different tickets).

To generate a ticket for a given epoch n:
```text
randSeed = GetBeaconEntryForEpoch(n)
newTicketRandomness = VRF_miner(H(TicketProdDST || index || Serialization(randSeed, minerActorAddress)))
```

We use the VRF from {{<sref vrf>}} for ticket generation (see the `PrepareNewTicket` method below).

{{< readfile file="../../filecoin_mining/storage_mining/storage_mining_subsystem.go" code="true" lang="go" >}}


### Ticket Validation

Each Ticket should be generated from the prior one in the VRF-chain and verified accordingly as shown in `validateTicket` below.

{{< readfile file="storage_power_consensus_subsystem.id" code="true" lang="go" >}}
{{< readfile file="storage_power_consensus_subsystem.go" code="true" lang="go" >}}

{{<label min_miner_size>}}
## Minimum Miner Size

In order to secure Storage Power Consensus, the system defines a minimum miner size required to participate in consensus.

Specifically, miners must have either at least `MIN_MINER_SIZE_STOR` of power (i.e. storage power currently used in storage deals) in order to participate in leader election. If no miner has `MIN_MINER_SIZE_STOR` or more power, miners with at least as much power as the smallest miner in the top `MIN_MINER_SIZE_TARG` of miners (sorted by storage power) will be able to participate in leader election. In plain english, take `MIN_MINER_SIZE_TARG = 3` for instance, this means that miners with at least as much power as the 3rd largest miner will be eligible to participate in consensus.

Miners smaller than this cannot mine blocks and earn block rewards in the network. Their power will still be counted in the total network (raw or claimed) storage power, even though their power will not be counted as votes for leader election. However, **it is important to note that such miners can still have their power faulted and be penalized accordingly**.

Accordingly, to bootstrap the network, the genesis block must include miners, potentially just CommittedCapacity sectors, to initiate the network.

The `MIN_MINER_SIZE_TARG` condition will not be used in a network in which any miner has more than `MIN_MINER_SIZE_STOR` power. It is nonetheless defined to ensure liveness in small networks (e.g. close to genesis or after large power drops).

{{% notice placeholder %}}
The below values are currently placeholders.
{{% /notice %}}

We currently set:

- `MIN_MINER_SIZE_STOR = 100 * (1 << 40) Bytes` (100 TiB)
- `MIN_MINER_SIZE_TARG = 3

## Network recovery after halting

Placeholder where we will define a means of rebooting network liveness after it halts catastrophically (i.e. empty power table).
