---
title: "Expected Consensus"
---

## Algorithm

Expected Consensus (EC) is a probabilistic Byzantine fault-tolerant consensus protocol. At a high level, it operates by running a leader election every round in which, on expectation, one participant may be eligible to submit a block. EC guarantees that this winner will be anonymous until they reveal themselves by submitting a proof of their election (we call this proof an `Election Proof`). All valid blocks submitted in a given round form a `Tipset`. Every block in a Tipset adds weight to its chain. The 'best' chain is the one with the highest weight, which is to say that the fork choice rule is to choose the heaviest known chain. For more details on how to select the heaviest chain, see [Chain Selection](#chain-selection).

EC is called by the {{<sref storage_power_consensus>}} subsystem in order to run a new round of leader election and validate incoming blocks' election proofs.

{{<label secret_leader_election>}}
## Secret Leader Election

Expected Consensus is a consensus protocol that works by electing a miner from a weighted set in proportion to their power. In the case of Filecoin, participants and powers are drawn from the storage [power table](storage-market.md#the-power-table), where power is equivalent to storage provided through time.

Leader Election in Expected Consensus must be Secret, Fair and Verifiable. This is achieved through the use of randomness used to run the election. In the case of Filecoin's EC, the blockchain tracks an independent ticket chain. These tickets are used as randomness inputs for Leader Election. Every block generated references an `ElectionProof` derived from a past ticket. The ticket chain is extended by the miner who generates a new ticket with each attempted election.

### Tickets

One may think of leader election in EC as a verifiable lottery, in which participants win in proportion to the power they have within the network.

A ticket is drawn from the past at the beginning of each new round, and a new ticket is generated in every round. Tickets are chained independently of the main blockchain. A ticket only depends on the ticket before it, and not any other data in the block. Nonetheless, in Filecoin, every block header contains one or more new tickets, thereby extending the ticket chain. A miner generates a new ticket in their block for every ticket they scratch running leader election, thereby ensuring the ticket chain is at least as long as the block chain.

At a high-level, tickets are used as sources of randomness in EC in order to achieve the following:

- Ensure leader secrecy -- meaning a block producer will not be known until they release their block to the network.
- Prove leader election -- meaning a block producer can be verified by any participant in the network.

You can find the Ticket data structure [here](data-structures.md#tickets).

In practice, EC defines two different fields within a block:

- A `Tickets` array — this stores new tickets generated during this block generation attempt. It proves appropriate delay. It is from this array that miners will sample randomness to run leader election in `K` rounds. See [Ticket generation](#ticket-generation).
- An `ElectionProof` — this stores a proof that a given miner scratched a winning lottery ticket using the appropriate ticket `K` rounds back. It proves that the leader was elected in this round. See [Checking election results](#checking-election-results).

On expectation, the `Tickets` array will contain a single ticket. For cases in which it contains more than one, see [Losing Tickets](#losing-tickets).

```
But why the randomness lookback?

The randomness lookback helps turn independent lotteries (ticket drawings from a block one round back)
into a global lottery instead. Rather than having a distinct chance of winning or losing
for each potential fork in a given round, a miner will either win on all or lose on all
forks descended from the block in which the ticket is sampled.

This is useful as it reduces opportunities for grinding, across forks or sybil identities.

However this introduces a tradeoff:
- The randomness lookback means that a miner can know K rounds in advance that they will win,
decreasing the cost of running a targeted attack (given they have local predictability).
- It means electionProofs are stored separately from new tickets on a block, taking up
more space on-chain.
```

##### Comparing Tickets

Whenever comparing tickets is evoked, for instance when discussing selecting the "min ticket" in a Tipset, the comparison is that of the little endian representation of the ticket's VDFOutput bytes.

#### Ticket generation

This section discusses how tickets are generated by EC for the `Tickets` array. For how tickets are validated, see [ticket validation](mining.md#ticket-validation).

At round `N`, new tickets are generated using tickets drawn from the [Tipset](#tipsets) at round `N-1`. This ensures the miner cannot publish a new block (corresponding to the `ElectionProof` generated by a winning ticket `K` rounds back) until the correct round. Because a Tipset can contain multiple blocks (see [Chain Selection](#chain-selection) below), the smallest ticket in the Tipset must be drawn otherwise the block will be invalid.

```
   ┌──────────────────────┐                     
   │                      │                     
   │                      │                     
   │┌────┐                │                     
   ││ TA │              A │                     
   └┴────┴────────────────┘                     
                                                
   ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─                      
                          │                     
   │                                            
    ┌────┐                │       TA < TB < TC  
   ││ TB │              B                       
    ┴────┘─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘                     
                                                
   ┌ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─                      
                          │                     
   │                                            
    ┌────┐                │                     
   ││ TC │              C                       
    ┴────┘─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘                     
```

In the above diagram, a miner will use block A's Ticket to generate a new ticket (or an election proof farther in the future) since it is the smallest in the Tipset.

The miner runs the prior ticket through a Verifiable Random Function (VRF) to get a new unique output.

The VRF's deterministic output adds entropy to the ticket chain, limiting a miner's ability to alter one block to influence a future ticket (given a miner does not know who will win a given round in advance).

We use the ECVRF algorithm from [Goldberg et al. Section 5](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-vrf-04#page-10), with:
  - Sha256 for our hashing function
  - Secp256k1 for our curve
  - Note that the operation type in step 2.1 is necessary to prevent an adversary from guessing an election proof for a miner ahead of time.

### Running a leader election

Now, a miner must also check whether they are eligible to mine a block in this round. For how Election Proofs are validated, see [election validation](mining.md#election-validation).

To do so, the miner will use tickets from K rounds back as randomness to uniformly draw a value from 0 to 1. Comparing this value to their power, they determine whether they are eligible to mine. A user's `power` is defined as the ratio of the amount of storage they proved as of their last PoSt submission to the total storage in the network as of the current block.

We use the ECVRF algorithm (must yield a pseudorandom, deterministic output) from [Goldberg et al. Section 5](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-vrf-04#page-10), with:
  - Sha256 for our hashing function
  - Secp256k1 for our curve

If the miner scratches a winning ticket in this round, it can use newEP, along with a newTicket to generate and publish a new block (see [Block Generation](#block-generation)). Otherwise, it waits to hear of another block generated in this round.

It is important to note that every block contains two artifacts: one, a ticket derived from last block's ticket to prove that they have waited the appropriate delay, and two, an election proof derived from the ticket `K` rounds back used to run leader election.

### Block Generation

Once a miner has a winning election proof generated over `i` rounds and `i` corresponding tickets, they may create a block. For more on this, see the [Mining spec](mining.md#block-creation).

{{<label chain_selection>}}
## Chain Selection

Just as there can be 0 miners win in a round, multiple miners can be elected in a given round. This in turn means multiple blocks can be created in a round. In order to avoid wasting valid work done by miners, EC makes use of all valid blocks generated in a round.

### Tipsets

All valid blocks generated in a round form a `Tipset` that participants will attempt to mine off of in the subsequent round (see above). Tipsets are valid so long as:

- All blocks in a Tipset have the same parent Tipset
- All blocks in a Tipset have the same number of tickets in their `Tickets` array

These conditions imply that all blocks in a Tipset were mined at the same height. This rule is key to helping ensure that EC converges over time. While multiple new blocks can be mined in a round, subsequent blocks all mine off of a Tipset bringing these blocks together. The second rule means blocks in a Tipset are mined in a same round.

The blocks in a tipset have no defined order in representation. During state computation, blocks in a tipset are processed in order of block ticket, breaking ties with the block CID bytes.

Due to network propagation delay, it is possible for a miner in round N+1 to omit valid blocks mined at round N from their Tipset. This does not make the newly generated block invalid, it does however reduce its weight and chances of being part of the canonical chain in the protocol.

{{<label chain_weighting>}}
### Chain Weighting

It is possible for forks to emerge naturally in Expected Consensus. EC relies on weighted chains in order to quickly converge on 'one true chain', with every block adding to the chain's weight. This means the heaviest chain should reflect the most amount of work performed, or in Filecoin's case, the most storage provided.

In short, the weight at each block is equal to its `ParentWeight` plus that block's delta weight.
Delta weight is a term composed of a few elements:
- A wForkFactor: which seeks to cut the weight derived from rounds in which produced Tipsets do not correspond to what an honest chain is likely to have yielded (pointing to selfish mining or other non-collaborative miner behavior).
- A wPowerFactor: which adds weight to the chain proportional to the total power backing the chain, i.e. accounted for in the chain's power table. 
- A wBlocksFactor: which adds weight to the chain proportional to the number of blocks mined in a given round. Like wForkFactor, it rewards miner cooperation (which will yield more blocks per round on expectation).

We have:

w[r+1] = w[r] + wForkFactor(wPowerFactor[r+1] + wBlocksFactor[r+1])

with, for a given tipset ts in round r+1:

- wBlocksFactor[r+1] = v * |blocksInTipset(ts)|
  - with v = vt * log2(totalPowerAtTipset(ts) * vs)/vs
- wPowerFactor[r+1]  = log2(totalPowerAtTipset(ts))
- wForkFactor[r+1]   = CDF(X, k) with X -> Bin(eNumberOfBlocksPerRound * numberOfMinersInPowerTable, 1/numberOfMinersInPowerTable)

The weight should be rounded down to its fourth decimal at each height (i.e. each time it is recalculated).

```sh
Note that if your implementation does not allow for rounding to the fourth decimal, miners should apply the [tie-breaker below](#selecting-between-tipsets-with-equal-weight). Weight changes will be on the order of single digit numbers on expectation, so this should not have an outsized impact on chain consensus across implementations.
```

Details of Filecoin's chain weighting function [are included here](https://observablehq.com/d/3812cd65c054082d).

 The exact value for these parameters remain to be determined, but for testing purposes, you may use:
 - `vt = 350`
 - `vs = E-5`

`ParentWeight` is the aggregate chain weight of a given block's parent set. It is calculated as
the `ParentWeight` of any of its parent blocks (all blocks in a given Tipset should have
the same `ParentWeight` value) plus the delta weight of each parent. To make the
computation a bit easier, a block's `ParentWeight` is stored in the block itself (otherwise
potentially long chain scans would be required to compute a given block's weight).

### Selecting between Tipsets with equal weight

When selecting between Tipsets of equal weight, a miner chooses the one with the smallest final ticket.

In the case where two Tipsets of equal weight have the same min ticket, the miner will compare the next smallest ticket (and select the Tipset with the next smaller ticket). This continues until one Tipset is selected.

The above case may happen in situations under certain block propagation conditions. Assume three blocks B, C, and D have been mined (by miners 1, 2, and 3 respectively) off of block A, with minTicket(B) < minTicket(C) < minTicket (D).

Miner 1 outputs their block B and shuts down. Miners 2 and 3 both receive B but not each others' blocks. We have miner 2 mining a Tipset made of B and C and miner 3 mining a Tipset made of B and D. If both succesfully mine blocks now, other miners in the network will receive new blocks built off of Tipsets with equal weight and the same smallest ticket (that of block B). They should select the block mined atop [B, C] since minTicket(C) < minTicket(D).

The probability that two Tipsets with different blocks would have all the same tickets can be considered negligible: this would amount to finding a collision between two 256-bit (or more) collision-resistant hashes.

### Slashing in EC

Due to the existence of potential forks, a miner can try to unduly influence protocol fairness. This means they may choose to disregard the protocol in order to gain an advantage over the power they should normally get from their storage on the network. A miner should be slashed if they are provably deviating from the honest protocol.

This is detectable when a miner submits two blocks that satisfy either of the following "slashing conditions":

(1) one block contains at least one ticket in its ticket array generated at the same round as one of the tickets in the other block's ticket array.
(2) one block's parent is a Tipset that could have validly included the other block according to Tipset validity rules, however the parent of the first block does not include the other block.

  - While it cannot be proven that a miner omits known blocks from a Tipset in general (i.e. network latency could simply mean the miner did not receive a particular block) in this case it can be proven because a miner must be aware of a block they mined in a previous round.

Any node that detects this occurring should take both block headers, and call [`storagemarket.SlashConsensusFault`](actors.md#slashconsensusfault). The network will then take all of that node's collateral, give a portion of it to
the reporter, and keep the rest.

## Implementation Notes

- When selecting messages from the mempool to include in the block, be aware that other miners may also generate blocks during this round, and to maximize fee earnings it may be best to select some messages at random (second in a duplicate earns no fees).
