---
title: "Expected Consensus"
weight: 1
---

# Expected Consensus
---

## Algorithm

Expected Consensus (EC) is a probabilistic Byzantine fault-tolerant consensus protocol. At a high level, it operates by running a leader election every round in which, on expectation, one participant may be eligible to submit a block. EC guarantees that this winner will be anonymous until they reveal themselves by submitting a proof of their election. The miner can submit a number of such proofs per round and will be rewarded proportionally. Each proof can be derived from a `Challenge Ticket` produced by the [Election PoSt](election_post). All valid blocks submitted in a given round form a `Tipset`. Every block in a Tipset adds weight to its chain. The 'best' chain is the one with the highest weight, which is to say that the fork choice rule is to choose the heaviest known chain. For more details on how to select the heaviest chain, see [Chain Selection](expected_consensus#chain-selection).

At a very high level, with every new block generated, a miner will craft a new ticket from the prior one in the chain appended with the current epoch number (i.e. parentTipset.epoch + 1 to start). While on expectation at least one block will be generated at every round, in cases where no one finds a block in a given round, a miner will increment the round number and attempt a new leader election (using the new input) thereby ensuring liveness in the protocol.

The [Storage Power Consensus](storage_power_consensus) subsystem uses access to EC to use the following facilities:

- Access to verifiable randomness for the protocol, derived from [Tickets](storage_power_consensus#tickets).
- Running and verifying [Secret Leader Election](expected_consensus#secret-leader-election) for block generation.
- Access to a weighting function enabling [Chain Selection](expected_consensus#chain-selection) by the chain manager.
- Access to the most recently finalized tipset (see [Finality in EC](expected_consensus#finality-in-ec)) available to all protocol participants.

{{<embed src="../../systems/filecoin_blockchain/storage_power_consensus/expected_consensus.id"  lang="go" >}} 
{{<embed src="../../systems/filecoin_blockchain/storage_power_consensus/expected_consensus.go"  lang="go" >}}

## Tickets in EC

Within SPC, a miner generates a new ticket in their block for every ticket they use running leader election, thereby ensuring the ticket chain is always as long as the block chain.

Tickets are used to achieve the following:

- Ensure leader secrecy -- meaning a block producer will not be known until they release their block to the network.
- Prove leader election -- meaning a block producer can be verified by any participant in the network.

In practice, EC defines two different fields within a block:

- A `Ticket` field — this stores the new ticket generated during this block generation attempt. It is from this ticket that miners will sample randomness to run leader election in `K` rounds (see [Tickets](storage_power_consensus#tickets)).
- A set of winning `ChallengeTickets` — this stores a proof that a given miner has won a leader election using the appropriate ticket generated by the election PoSt process with randomness `K` rounds back. It proves that the leader was validly elected in this epoch.

{{<embed src="../../systems/filecoin_blockchain/struct/block/election.id"  lang="go" >}}
{{<embed src="../../systems/filecoin_blockchain/struct/block/election.go"  lang="go" >}}

**But why the randomness lookback?**

The randomness lookback helps turn independent ticket generation from a block one round back
into a global ticket generation game instead. Rather than having a distinct chance of winning or losing
for each potential fork in a given round, a miner will either win on all or lose on all
forks descended from the block in which the ticket is sampled.

This is useful as it reduces opportunities for grinding, across forks or sybil identities.

However this introduces a tradeoff:

- The randomness lookback means that a miner can know K rounds in advance that they will win,
decreasing the cost of running a targeted attack (given they have local predictability).

How is K selected?

- On the one end, there is no advantage to picking K larger than finality.
- On the other, making K smaller reduces adversarial power to grind.

## Secret Leader Election

Expected Consensus is a consensus protocol that works by electing a miner from a weighted set in proportion to their power. In the case of Filecoin, participants and powers are drawn from the [The Power Table](storage_power_actor#the-power-table), where power is equivalent to storage provided through time.

Leader Election in Expected Consensus must be Secret, Fair and Verifiable. This is achieved through the use of randomness used to run the election. In the case of Filecoin's EC, the blockchain tracks an independent ticket chain. These tickets are used as randomness inputs for Leader Election. Every block generated references winning `ChallengeTickets` generated using a past ticket. The ticket chain is extended by the miner who generates a new block for each successful leader election.

### Running a leader election

Now, a miner must also check whether they are eligible to mine a block in this round.

Design goals here include:

- Miners should be rewarded proportional to their power in the system
- The system should be able to tune how many blocks are put out per epoch on expectation (hence "expected consensus").

As discussed in [Election PoSt](election_post), a miner will use the challenge ticket of an ElectionPoSt to uniformly draw a value from 0 to 1 when crafting a block.

The miner gets to draw one such challenge ticket per sector they have committed and must then compare the value derived from the challenge ticket against a target to determine whether they are eligible to mine. This is called finding a winning ticket.

The target is set as follows, for each sector sampled for a ticket from the miner's `ProvingSet` and the number of sectors in the set:

```text
target = activePowerInSector/networkPower * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch * numSectorsMiner / numSectorsSampled
```

The target ensures that the miner can express the power across all of their sectors through the tickets they have sampled. Specifically, on expectation, checking `numSectorsSampled` (with `numSectorsSampled = ceil(len(provingSet) * EPoStSampleRate)`) challenge tickets in every epoch, a miner will find `minerPower/networkPower * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch` winning tickets per epoch on expectation. Note that while the sectorPower may differ based on the challenged sector, i.e. in any given epoch a miner may have an advantage (if picking sectors with more than the average across all their sectors) or a disadvantage (conversely) in their election; but over multiple epochs, on expectation the election will be fair.

```text
We elaborate on the above claim:

We want the miner's expected wins over time to be equal to w = minerPower/networkPower * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch

Take P to be the average miner power over the N sectors in their ProvingSet.
We have P = SUM_{i=0}^N P_i / N

The miner's likelihood of winning an election in any epoch is, for C tickets randomly drawn
W = C * target = C * P_i/networkPower * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch * N/C = N * P_i/networkPower * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch

with N * P_i ~= minerPower on expectation over enough epochs. That is to say: W = minerPower/networkPower * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch as wanted.
```

We show this below, removing division for ease of implementation:

```text
const maxChallengeTicketSize = 2^len(H)

def TicketIsWinner(challengeTicket):
    // Check that `ChallengeTicket < Target`
    return challengeTicket * networkPower * numSectorsSampled < activePowerInSector * EC.ExpectedLeadersPerEpoch * maxChallengeTicketSize * numSectorsMiner
```

If the miner finds any winning ticket in this round, it can use it, along with a new randomness ticket to generate and publish a new block. Otherwise, it waits to hear of another block generated in this round.

We also use the [Verifiable Random Function](vrf) to draw randomness as part of crafting the Challenge Tickets in order to ensure leader election is secret (a miner cannot be known to win until they publish their ticket on the chain).

It is important to note that every block contains three artifacts: one, a ticket derived from last block's ticket to extend the ticket-chain, two, a challenge ticket array PoSt process run in this epoch, and three a PoStProof to prove each ChallengeTicket was derived correctly.

### Election Validation

In order to determine that the mined block was generated by an eligible miner, one must check its `ChallengeTickets`' validity and that they were generated appropriately by the PoSt generator. Thereafter, for each ticket the miner must check that it is a winning challenge ticket, per the above definition.

## Chain Selection

Just as there can be 0 miners win in a round, multiple miners can be elected in a given round. This in turn means multiple blocks can be created in a round, as seen above. In order to avoid wasting valid work done by miners, EC makes use of all valid blocks generated in a round.

### Chain Weighting

It is possible for forks to emerge naturally in Expected Consensus. EC relies on weighted chains in order to quickly converge on 'one true chain', with every block adding to the chain's weight. This means the heaviest chain should reflect the most amount of work performed, or in Filecoin's case, the most storage provided.

In short, the weight at each block is equal to its `ParentWeight` plus that block's delta weight. Details of Filecoin's chain weighting function [are included here](https://observablehq.com/d/3812cd65c054082d).

Delta weight is a term composed of a few elements:

- wPowerFactor: which adds weight to the chain proportional to the total power backing the chain, i.e. accounted for in the chain's power table.
- wBlocksFactor: which adds weight to the chain proportional to the number of tickets mined in a given epoch. It rewards miner cooperation (which will yield more blocks per round on expectation).

The weight should be calculated using big integer arithmetic with order of operations defined above. We use brackets instead of parentheses below for legibility. We have:

```text
w[r+1] = w[r] + (wPowerFactor[r+1] + wBlocksFactor[r+1]) * 2^8
```

For a given tipset `ts` in round `r+1`, we define:

- `wPowerFactor[r+1]  = wFunction(totalPowerAtTipset(ts))`
- wBlocksFactor[r+1] =  `wPowerFactor[r+1] * wRatio * t / e`
  - with `t = |ticketsInTipset(ts)|`
  - `e = expected number of tickets per round in the protocol`
  - and `wRatio in ]0, 1[`
Thus, for stability of weight across implementations, we take:
- wBlocksFactor[r+1] =  `(wPowerFactor[r+1] * b * wRatio_num) / (e * wRatio_den)`

We get:

```text
w[r+1] = w[r] + wFunction(totalPowerAtTipset(ts)) * 2^8 + (wFunction(totalPowerAtTipset(ts)) * len(ts.tickets) * wRatio_num * 2^8) / (e * wRatio_den)
```

Using the 2^8 here to prevent precision loss ahead of the division in the wBlocksFactor.

The exact value for these parameters remain to be determined, but for testing purposes, you may use:

 - `e = 5`
 - `wRatio = .5, or wRatio_num = 1, wRatio_den = 2`
- `wFunction = log2b` with
  - `log2b(X) = floor(log2(x)) = (binary length of X) - 1` and `log2b(0) = 0`. Note that that special case should never be used (given it would mean an empty power table).

{{< hint warning >}}
**Note that if your implementation does not allow for rounding to the fourth decimal**, miners should apply the [tie-breaker below](#selecting-between-tipsets-with-equal-weight). Weight changes will be on the order of single digit numbers on expectation, so this should not have an outsized impact on chain consensus across implementations.
{{< /hint >}}

`ParentWeight` is the aggregate chain weight of a given block's parent set. It is calculated as
the `ParentWeight` of any of its parent blocks (all blocks in a given Tipset should have
the same `ParentWeight` value) plus the delta weight of each parent. To make the
computation a bit easier, a block's `ParentWeight` is stored in the block itself (otherwise
potentially long chain scans would be required to compute a given block's weight).

### Selecting between Tipsets with equal weight

When selecting between Tipsets of equal weight, a miner chooses the one with the smallest final ticket.

In the case where two Tipsets of equal weight have the same min ticket, the miner will compare the next smallest ticket (and select the Tipset with the next smaller ticket). This continues until one Tipset is selected.

The above case may happen in situations under certain block propagation conditions. Assume three blocks B, C, and D have been mined (by miners 1, 2, and 3 respectively) off of block A, with minTicket(B) < minTicket(C) < minTicket(D).

Miner 1 outputs their block B and shuts down. Miners 2 and 3 both receive B but not each others' blocks. We have miner 2 mining a Tipset made of B and C and miner 3 mining a Tipset made of B and D. If both succesfully mine blocks now, other miners in the network will receive new blocks built off of Tipsets with equal weight and the same smallest ticket (that of block B). They should select the block mined atop [B, C] since minTicket(C) < minTicket(D).

The probability that two Tipsets with different blocks would have all the same tickets can be considered negligible: this would amount to finding a collision between two 256-bit (or more) collision-resistant hashes.

## Finality in EC

EC enforces a version of soft finality whereby all miners at round N will reject all blocks that fork off prior to round N-F. For illustrative purposes, we can take F to be 500. While strictly speaking EC is a probabilistically final protocol, choosing such an F simplifies miner implementations and enforces a macroeconomically-enforced finality at no cost to liveness in the chain.

## Consensus Faults

Due to the existence of potential forks in EC, a miner can try to unduly influence protocol fairness. This means they may choose to disregard the protocol in order to gain an advantage over the power they should normally get from their storage on the network. A miner should be slashed if they are provably deviating from the honest protocol.

This is detectable when a given miner submits two blocks that satisfy any of the following "consensus faults". In all cases, we must have:

- both blocks were mined by the same miner
- both blocks have valid signatures
- first block's epoch is smaller or equal than second block

Thereafter, the faults are:

- 1. **double-fork mining fault**: two blocks mined at the same epoch.
   - `B4.Epoch == B5.Epoch` 
{{< svg src="diagrams/double_fork.dot.svg" title="Double-Fork Mining Fault" >}}

- 2. **time-offset mining fault**: two blocks mined off of the same Tipset at different epochs (i.e. with different `ChallengeTickets` generated from the same input ticket).
   - `B3.Parents == B4.Parents && B3.Epoch != B4.Epoch`
{{< svg src="diagrams/time_offset.dot.svg" title="Time-Offset Mining Fault" >}}

- 3. **parent-grinding fault**: one block's parent is a Tipset that provably should have included a given block but does not. While it cannot be proven that a missing block was willfully omitted in general (i.e. network latency could simply mean the miner did not receive a particular block), it can when a miner has successfully mined a block two epochs in a row and omitted one. That is, this condition should be evoked when a miner omits their own prior block.
Specifically, this can be proven with a "witness" block, that is by submitting blocks B2, B3, B4 where B2 is B4's parent and B3's sibling but B3 is not B4's parent.
    - `!B4.Parents.Include(B3) && B4.Parents.Include(B2) && B3.Parents == B2.Parents && B3.Epoch == B2.Epoch`
{{< svg src="diagrams/parent_grinding.dot.svg" title="Parent-Grinding fault" >}}

Any node that detects any of the above events should submit both block headers to the `StoragePowerActor`'s `ReportConsensusFault` method. The "slasher" will receive a portion of the offending miner's [Pledge Collateral](storage_power_actor#pledge-collateral) as a reward for notifying the network of the fault. Consensus faults (except for **uncommitted power fault** below which falls under storage faults with impact on consensus) will tentatively result in all pledge collateral being slashed and the miner removed from the power table. Some portion of the pledge collateral is given to the slasher as a function of some initial share (`SLASHER_INITIAL_SHARE`) and growth rate (`SLASHER_SHARE_GROWTH_RATE`). Slasher's share of the slashed collateral increases as block elapses since the block when the fault is committed. Default growth rate results in slasher's share reaches 1 after 250 blocks. However, only the first slasher gets its share of the pledge collateral and the remaining pledge collateral will be burned. The longer a slasher waits, the higher the likelihood that the slashed collateral will be claimed by another slasher.

It is important to note that there exists a third type of consensus fault directly reported by the `CronActor` on `StorageDeal` failures via the `ReportUncommittedPowerFault` method:

- 4. **uncommitted power fault** which occurs when a miner fails to submit their `PostProof` and is thus participating in leader election with undue power (see [Storage Faults](faults#storage-faults)).
